day-1/subnet-1-architecture.md, before:

## Overview
This first session is to create some of the architecture for the Capstone project. This guide will take you through creating the following architecture:
- VPC 
- Subnet 1 
- VM1 with external SSH connection enabled 
- VM2 with SSH enabled to receive connections only from VM1

This provides the architecture for a subnet containing a VM that will be a CI server with Jenkins and SSH enabled, and another that will be a permenant slave agent. 

This folder also provides the Terraform code for this architecture session. 

## Getting Started 
1. Open your playpen repo in VS Code then create and checkout a new branch

2. Create a new folder capstone-project, inside it create a folder called day-1 and cd into the folder in the terminal and run the following commands:

   ```
   gcloud auth login
   ```
   This will open a browser window that will ask you to log into your Google account. 
   Once you are logged in run
   ```
   gcloud config set project <YOUR PROJECT NAME>
   ```
   This will set your playpen project as your default project for gcloud operations.
4. To authenticate with terraform cloud run
   ```
   terraform login
   ```
   Then when prompted type "yes"
   This should open a window for you to log into Terraform Cloud. Click "Sign in with SSO" near the bottom of the page. On the next page type in your Organization name "lbg-cloud-platform" and hit next. You will then be asked to sign into your dev account. 

   When you reach your account you will be prompted to create an API token. Click create token and copy the token generated. Go back to your terminal and where it says enter value paste the API token you copied.



## Setting up the project
1. In the current folder, create a file called `networks.tf`, `vms.tf`, `variables.tf`, and `providers.tf`

2. In `providers.tf`, add the following block of code. Replace <WORKSPACE_HERE> with the name of your workspace. e.g. playpen-a1b2cd-gcp
```
   terraform {
   required_providers {
      google = {
         source  = "hashicorp/google"
         version = "~> 4.0.0"
      }
   }

      cloud {
      organization = "lbg-cloud-platform"

      workspaces {
               name = "<WORKSPACE_HERE>"
         }
      }   
   }

   provider "google" {
   project = var.project_id
   }
```

3. Currently, var.project_id is not defined, let's add the following block of code in `variables.tf` to define it. Replace the <PLAYPEN_PROJECT_ID_HERE> with the name of your playpen project, e.g. playpen-a1b2cd
```
variable "project_id" {
  description = "The ID of the GCP project where resources will be deployed"
  type        = string
  default     = "<PLAYPEN_PROJECT_ID_HERE>"
}
```

4. To initialise your Terraform directory and download the Google provider run
   ```
   terraform init
   ```

## Creating a VPC and a subnet

1. To create a VPC insert the following code block in `networks.tf`
   ```
    resource "google_compute_network" "vpc_network" {
        name                    = "vpc-network"
        auto_create_subnetworks = false
    }
   ```
   This will create a VPC in your project with the name "vpc-network". As we want to create our own subnet, we have set the argument "auto_create_subnetworks" to false.

2. To test that your VPC is configured correctly run
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   This will show you if you have any syntax errors and a plan of what will be provisioned in your GCP project

3. To create the subnet insert the following code block into `networks.tf`
   ```
    resource "google_compute_subnetwork" "subnet-1" {
        name          = "subnetwork-1"
        ip_cidr_range = "10.0.0.0/24"
        region        = var.region
        network       = google_compute_network.vpc_network.id
    }
   ```
   This will create a subnet called "subnetwork-1" within the VPC we have just declared. We have referenced the VPC with `google_compute_network.vpc_network.id` which fetches the ID of the VPC resource. 

4. Currently, the variable var.region is not defined. In `variables.tf`, add the following block of code to define var.region
```
   variable "region" {
   description = "The default GCP region to deploy resources to"
   type        = string
   default     = "europe-west2"
}
```

5. To test if the subnet is configured correctly run
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   If you are happy with the plan output, run
   ```
   terraform apply
   ```
   When  prompted type "yes" to execute the apply. This will provision the VPC and subnet in your GCP project. Once the apply is complete your VPC and subnet will be visible in the console.

## Creating a VM with external SSH connection enabled - architecture for a CI server with Jenkins
1. To create the linux compute instance, insert the following code block into `vms.tf`
```
   resource "google_compute_instance" "external_vm" {
      name         = "external-vm"
      machine_type = "e2-micro"
      zone         = "${var.region}-b"

      boot_disk {
         initialize_params {
            image = "ubuntu-os-cloud/ubuntu-1804-lts"
         }
      }

      network_interface {
         network    = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name
         subnetwork = google_compute_subnetwork.subnet-1.name
         access_config {
            // Ephemeral public IP
         }
      }
   }
```

2. To allow SSH access into this external-vm, we need to create a firewall rule. To do this insert the following code block into `networks.tf`. 
```
resource "google_compute_firewall" "allow_external_ssh" {
  name    = "allow-external-ssh"
  network = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name

  allow {
    protocol = "tcp"
    ports    = ["22"]
  }
  target_tags   = ["allow-external-ssh"]
  source_ranges = ["0.0.0.0/0"]
}
```
As we want SSH access from any source, we have allowed the source_ranges 0.0.0.0/0. We can use tags here to identify that which instances in the network may make network connections as specified in the firewall rule. In this case, let's assign it with the target_tags "allow-external-ssh". Any instance in the network that has this tag, will allow all SSH connections.

3. Lets now add that target tag to the external-vm so that the firewall rule applies. Add the following line in `vms.tf` in the external_vm instance, above the boot disk block. 
```
 tags = ["allow-external-ssh"]
```
Now anyone from anywhere is able to SSH into this instance. 


4. To connect to the external-vm, we need to generate an SSH key pair. Open a new terminal outside your code editor and ensure that you are in the root directory of your machine.  Then run the following line
   ```
   mkdir .ssh
   ```
   This will create a .ssh directory for you to store your SSH key pairs
   Then to generate your key pair run the following command in your terminal
   ```
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/myKeyFile -C testUser -b 2048
   ```
   You will then be prompted to enter a passphrase for your private key and confirm it. It is good practice to add a passphrase as it makes your private key more secure and it is often a requirement set by organisations to connect to their servers. However for this lab it is not required and you can simply press enter twice.

   Once this has run it will create two files: myKeyFile (the private key) and myKeyFile.pub (the public key) in the .ssh directory

3. To authenticate your connection over SSH to your Linux machine it will need the public key of your key pair. We can do this by adding the public key file to our terraform code. But first we will need to retrieve the contents of your public key file. In your terminal run the following command:
   ```
   cat ~/.ssh/myKeyFile.pub
   ```
   This will output the contents of the public key file into the terminal. Copy the entire contents of the file from `ssh-rsa` to `testUser` inclusive.

4. Add the following code into `vms.tf` into your compute instance (external_vm) resource block and replace "YOUR KEY FILE HERE" with the contents of your public key file
   ```
    metadata = {
        ssh-keys = "testUser:YOUR KEY FILE HERE"
    }
   ```
   This adds the user testUser to the machine and allows this user to connect to the instance if their machine has the corresponding private key to the public key on the machine.


5. To add the linux compute instance with external ssh access to our GCP project, run the following:
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   ```
   terraform apply
   ```

6. You are now ready to test the connection to your VM! Go to the GCP console and copy the external IP from the external-vm. Then run the following commands in the terminal, replacing <EXTERNAL_IP> with the copied external IP from GCP.
   ```
   ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
   ```
   When you have successfully connected you should be able to see a welcome message and `testUser@external-vm`

7. Now you are connected to you Linux VM you can run on it from your local machine. Try running the following command to output the version of Linux on the instance
   ```
   lsb_release -a
   ```


## Creating a VM with SSH enabled to receive connections from our already created external VM only - architecture for a permenant slave agent
1. To create the linux compute instance, insert the following code block into `vms.tf`
```
   resource "google_compute_instance" "internal_vm" {
      name         = "internal-vm"
      machine_type = "e2-micro"
      zone         = "${var.region}-b"

      boot_disk {
         initialize_params {
            image = "ubuntu-os-cloud/ubuntu-1804-lts"
         }
      }

      network_interface {
         network    = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name
         subnetwork = google_compute_subnetwork.subnet-1.name
         access_config {
            // Ephemeral public IP
         }
      }
   }
```
This is idential to our first external-vm but will have a different firewall rule applied to it. 

2. We want to create a firewall rule that applies only to the internal-vm and that only allows ssh connections from our external-vm. 

 In `networks.tf` add the following code block
```
resource "google_compute_firewall" "allow_internal_ssh" {
  name    = "allow-internal-ssh"
  network = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name

  allow {
    protocol = "tcp"
    ports    = ["22"]
  }
  target_tags   = ["allow-internal-ssh"]
  source_tags = ["allow-external-ssh"]
  
}
```
This firewall rule is very similar to the allow-external-ssh firewall rule, however we are using source_tags over source_ranges. If source tags are specified, any traffic coming from an instance in the network with that tag will be allowed. In this case, we want our external-vm to have SSH access to our internal-vm. Our external-vm currently has the tag "allow-external-ssh", so let's make that a source_tag. Let's create a tag called "allow-internal-ssh" and any instances in the network with that tag will have this firewall applied.

3. Now let's add the tag from the previous firewall into our internal-vm. This will allow SSH connection from our external-vm into our internal-vm. Add the following block of code in `vms.tf` in our internal-vm resource above the boot_disk block. 
```
   tags = ["allow-internal-ssh"]
```

4. To create these changes in our project, run the following
```
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

5. Now we have a VM with a firewall that only allows traffic to our interal vm via our external vm. However, no SSH keys have been generated to allow this SSH connection. The steps to generate an SSH key are very similar to what we did for our external-vm, however this time it will require a manual process rather than terraform. 

In the GCP console, copy the external IP of the external-vm. In the VS Code terminal, run the following code to SSH to the external-vm. Replacing <EXTERNAL_IP> with the copied external IP of the external-vm from GCP.
```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
```

6. You should now be in the external-vm terminal. Similar to how we generated our previous key pair, run the following commands 
 ```
   mkdir .ssh
   ```
   This will create a .ssh directory for you to store your SSH key pairs
   Then to generate your key pair run the following command in your terminal
 ```
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/myKeyFile -C testUser -b 2048
```

   You will then be prompted to enter a passphrase for your private key and confirm it. It is good practice to add a passphrase as it makes your private key more secure and it is often a requirement set by organisations to connect to their servers. However for this lab it is not required and you can simply press enter twice.

   Once this has run it will create two files: myKeyFile (the private key) and myKeyFile.pub (the public key) in the .ssh directory

7. To authenticate your connection over SSH to your internal-vm machine it will need the public key of your key pair. We can do this by adding the public key file to the internal-vm. But first we will need to retrieve the contents of your public key file. In your terminal run the following command:
   ```
   cat ~/.ssh/myKeyFile.pub
   ```
   This will output the contents of the public key file into the terminal. Copy the entire contents of the file from `ssh-rsa` to `testUser` inclusive.

   Type `exit` to exit the VM session.

8. In `vms.tf`, in the `internal_vm` resource block, add the following block of code to add the copied SSH key onto the internal-vm. This will allow SSH access from the external-vm into the internal-vm.
```
metadata = {
    ssh-keys = "testUser:<SSH KEY HERE>"
  }
```

9. In the terminal, run
```
terraform plan
```
You should see 0 to add, 1 change, 0 to destroy. Where the change is the addition of the SSH key. If you're happy with the plan, run
```
terraform apply
```
This should add the new SSH key to the internal_vm.

9. To test the connectivity to the internal-vm, we first must SSH back into the external-vm.

```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
```

10. Run the following command to test the SSH connection from our external-vm to our internal-vm. Where the <INTERNAL_IP> is the internal IP of the internal-vm. 
 ```
   ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<INTERNAL_IP>
```

10. You should now find that you have an SSH connection into the internal-vm. Therefore for SSH traffic to reach the internal-vm, it first must go through the external-vm. To check that the external-vm is SSH accessible from anywhere, and that the internal-vm is only accessible from the external-vm, run the following commands outside of any vm sessions. You can exit a vm session by typing `exit`. The first should form a successful connection. Then type exit to exit the session. The second should time out. 
```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<external-vm EXTERNAL_IP>
exit
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<internal-vm INTERNAL_IP>
```

## Finishing up
You have now created:
- VPC 
- Subnet 1 
- VM1 with external SSH connection enabled 
- VM2 with SSH enabled to receive connections only from VM1

You now have the base architecture for your first subnet where the external-vm will become a CI server with Jenkins, and the internal-vm will become a permenant slave agent.

## Next steps
The next guide to follow is subnet-2-architecture.md which will take you through the creation of the second subnet in the architecture.

Commit message:

adds guide for jenkins installation

day-1/subnet-1-architecture.md, after:

## Overview
This first session is to create some of the architecture for the Capstone project. This guide will take you through creating the following architecture:
- VPC 
- Subnet 1 
- VM1 with external SSH connection enabled 
- VM2 with SSH enabled to receive connections only from VM1

This provides the architecture for a subnet containing a VM that will be a CI server with Jenkins and SSH enabled, and another that will be a permenant slave agent. 

This folder also provides the Terraform code for this architecture session. 

## Getting Started 
1. Open your playpen repo in VS Code then create and checkout a new branch

2. Create a new folder capstone-project, inside it create a folder called day-1 and cd into the folder in the terminal and run the following commands:

   ```
   gcloud auth login
   ```
   This will open a browser window that will ask you to log into your Google account. 
   Once you are logged in run
   ```
   gcloud config set project <YOUR PROJECT NAME>
   ```
   This will set your playpen project as your default project for gcloud operations.
4. To authenticate with terraform cloud run
   ```
   terraform login
   ```
   Then when prompted type "yes"
   This should open a window for you to log into Terraform Cloud. Click "Sign in with SSO" near the bottom of the page. On the next page type in your Organization name "lbg-cloud-platform" and hit next. You will then be asked to sign into your dev account. 

   When you reach your account you will be prompted to create an API token. Click create token and copy the token generated. Go back to your terminal and where it says enter value paste the API token you copied.



## Setting up the project
1. In the current folder, create a file called `networks.tf`, `vms.tf`, `variables.tf`, and `providers.tf`

2. In `providers.tf`, add the following block of code. Replace <WORKSPACE_HERE> with the name of your workspace. e.g. playpen-a1b2cd-gcp
```
   terraform {
   required_providers {
      google = {
         source  = "hashicorp/google"
         version = "~> 4.0.0"
      }
   }

      cloud {
      organization = "lbg-cloud-platform"

      workspaces {
               name = "<WORKSPACE_HERE>"
         }
      }   
   }

   provider "google" {
   project = var.project_id
   }
```

3. Currently, var.project_id is not defined, let's add the following block of code in `variables.tf` to define it. Replace the <PLAYPEN_PROJECT_ID_HERE> with the name of your playpen project, e.g. playpen-a1b2cd
```
variable "project_id" {
  description = "The ID of the GCP project where resources will be deployed"
  type        = string
  default     = "<PLAYPEN_PROJECT_ID_HERE>"
}
```

4. To initialise your Terraform directory and download the Google provider run
   ```
   terraform init
   ```

## Creating a VPC and a subnet

1. To create a VPC insert the following code block in `networks.tf`
   ```
    resource "google_compute_network" "vpc_network" {
        name                    = "vpc-network"
        auto_create_subnetworks = false
    }
   ```
   This will create a VPC in your project with the name "vpc-network". As we want to create our own subnet, we have set the argument "auto_create_subnetworks" to false.

2. To test that your VPC is configured correctly run
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   This will show you if you have any syntax errors and a plan of what will be provisioned in your GCP project

3. To create the subnet insert the following code block into `networks.tf`
   ```
    resource "google_compute_subnetwork" "subnet-1" {
        name          = "subnetwork-1"
        ip_cidr_range = "10.0.0.0/24"
        region        = var.region
        network       = google_compute_network.vpc_network.id
    }
   ```
   This will create a subnet called "subnetwork-1" within the VPC we have just declared. We have referenced the VPC with `google_compute_network.vpc_network.id` which fetches the ID of the VPC resource. 

4. Currently, the variable var.region is not defined. In `variables.tf`, add the following block of code to define var.region
```
   variable "region" {
   description = "The default GCP region to deploy resources to"
   type        = string
   default     = "europe-west2"
}
```

5. To test if the subnet is configured correctly run
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   If you are happy with the plan output, run
   ```
   terraform apply
   ```
   When  prompted type "yes" to execute the apply. This will provision the VPC and subnet in your GCP project. Once the apply is complete your VPC and subnet will be visible in the console.

## Creating a VM with external SSH connection enabled - architecture for a CI server with Jenkins
1. To create the linux compute instance, insert the following code block into `vms.tf`. The machine_type here is e2-small as the requirements to run Jenkins (covered in future guide) requires more RAM than e2-micro provides.
```
   resource "google_compute_instance" "external_vm" {
      name         = "external-vm"
      machine_type = "e2-small"
      zone         = "${var.region}-b"

      boot_disk {
         initialize_params {
            image = "ubuntu-os-cloud/ubuntu-1804-lts"
         }
      }

      network_interface {
         network    = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name
         subnetwork = google_compute_subnetwork.subnet-1.name
         access_config {
            // Ephemeral public IP
         }
      }
   }
```

2. To allow SSH access into this external-vm, we need to create a firewall rule. To do this insert the following code block into `networks.tf`. 
```
resource "google_compute_firewall" "allow_external_ssh" {
  name    = "allow-external-ssh"
  network = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name

  allow {
    protocol = "tcp"
    ports    = ["22"]
  }
  target_tags   = ["allow-external-ssh"]
  source_ranges = ["0.0.0.0/0"]
}
```
As we want SSH access from any source, we have allowed the source_ranges 0.0.0.0/0. We can use tags here to identify that which instances in the network may make network connections as specified in the firewall rule. In this case, let's assign it with the target_tags "allow-external-ssh". Any instance in the network that has this tag, will allow all SSH connections.

3. Lets now add that target tag to the external-vm so that the firewall rule applies. Add the following line in `vms.tf` in the external_vm instance, above the boot disk block. 
```
 tags = ["allow-external-ssh"]
```
Now anyone from anywhere is able to SSH into this instance. 


4. To connect to the external-vm, we need to generate an SSH key pair. Open a new terminal outside your code editor and ensure that you are in the root directory of your machine.  Then run the following line
   ```
   mkdir .ssh
   ```
   This will create a .ssh directory for you to store your SSH key pairs
   Then to generate your key pair run the following command in your terminal
   ```
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/myKeyFile -C testUser -b 2048
   ```
   You will then be prompted to enter a passphrase for your private key and confirm it. It is good practice to add a passphrase as it makes your private key more secure and it is often a requirement set by organisations to connect to their servers. However for this lab it is not required and you can simply press enter twice.

   Once this has run it will create two files: myKeyFile (the private key) and myKeyFile.pub (the public key) in the .ssh directory

3. To authenticate your connection over SSH to your Linux machine it will need the public key of your key pair. We can do this by adding the public key file to our terraform code. But first we will need to retrieve the contents of your public key file. In your terminal run the following command:
   ```
   cat ~/.ssh/myKeyFile.pub
   ```
   This will output the contents of the public key file into the terminal. Copy the entire contents of the file from `ssh-rsa` to `testUser` inclusive.

4. Add the following code into `vms.tf` into your compute instance (external_vm) resource block and replace "YOUR KEY FILE HERE" with the contents of your public key file
   ```
    metadata = {
        ssh-keys = "testUser:YOUR KEY FILE HERE"
    }
   ```
   This adds the user testUser to the machine and allows this user to connect to the instance if their machine has the corresponding private key to the public key on the machine.


5. To add the linux compute instance with external ssh access to our GCP project, run the following:
   ```
   terraform plan
   ```
   ```
   terraform apply
   ```

6. You are now ready to test the connection to your VM! Go to the GCP console and copy the external IP from the external-vm. Then run the following commands in the terminal, replacing <EXTERNAL_IP> with the copied external IP from GCP.
   ```
   ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
   ```
   When you have successfully connected you should be able to see a welcome message and `testUser@external-vm`

7. Now you are connected to you Linux VM you can run on it from your local machine. Try running the following command to output the version of Linux on the instance
   ```
   lsb_release -a
   ```


## Creating a VM with SSH enabled to receive connections from our already created external VM only - architecture for a permenant slave agent
1. To create the linux compute instance, insert the following code block into `vms.tf`
```
   resource "google_compute_instance" "internal_vm" {
      name         = "internal-vm"
      machine_type = "e2-micro"
      zone         = "${var.region}-b"

      boot_disk {
         initialize_params {
            image = "ubuntu-os-cloud/ubuntu-1804-lts"
         }
      }

      network_interface {
         network    = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name
         subnetwork = google_compute_subnetwork.subnet-1.name
         access_config {
            // Ephemeral public IP
         }
      }
   }
```
This is idential to our first external-vm but will have a different firewall rule applied to it. 

2. We want to create a firewall rule that applies only to the internal-vm and that only allows ssh connections from our external-vm. 

 In `networks.tf` add the following code block
```
resource "google_compute_firewall" "allow_internal_ssh" {
  name    = "allow-internal-ssh"
  network = google_compute_network.vpc_network.name

  allow {
    protocol = "tcp"
    ports    = ["22"]
  }
  target_tags   = ["allow-internal-ssh"]
  source_tags = ["allow-external-ssh"]
  
}
```
This firewall rule is very similar to the allow-external-ssh firewall rule, however we are using source_tags over source_ranges. If source tags are specified, any traffic coming from an instance in the network with that tag will be allowed. In this case, we want our external-vm to have SSH access to our internal-vm. Our external-vm currently has the tag "allow-external-ssh", so let's make that a source_tag. Let's create a tag called "allow-internal-ssh" and any instances in the network with that tag will have this firewall applied.

3. Now let's add the tag from the previous firewall into our internal-vm. This will allow SSH connection from our external-vm into our internal-vm. Add the following block of code in `vms.tf` in our internal-vm resource above the boot_disk block. 
```
   tags = ["allow-internal-ssh"]
```

4. To create these changes in our project, run the following
```
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

5. Now we have a VM with a firewall that only allows traffic to our interal vm via our external vm. However, no SSH keys have been generated to allow this SSH connection. The steps to generate an SSH key are very similar to what we did for our external-vm, however this time it will require a manual process rather than terraform. 

In the GCP console, copy the external IP of the external-vm. In the VS Code terminal, run the following code to SSH to the external-vm. Replacing <EXTERNAL_IP> with the copied external IP of the external-vm from GCP.
```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
```

6. You should now be in the external-vm terminal. Similar to how we generated our previous key pair, run the following commands 
 ```
   mkdir .ssh
   ```
   This will create a .ssh directory for you to store your SSH key pairs
   Then to generate your key pair run the following command in your terminal
 ```
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/myKeyFile -C testUser -b 2048
```

   You will then be prompted to enter a passphrase for your private key and confirm it. It is good practice to add a passphrase as it makes your private key more secure and it is often a requirement set by organisations to connect to their servers. However for this lab it is not required and you can simply press enter twice.

   Once this has run it will create two files: myKeyFile (the private key) and myKeyFile.pub (the public key) in the .ssh directory

7. To authenticate your connection over SSH to your internal-vm machine it will need the public key of your key pair. We can do this by adding the public key file to the internal-vm. But first we will need to retrieve the contents of your public key file. In your terminal run the following command:
   ```
   cat ~/.ssh/myKeyFile.pub
   ```
   This will output the contents of the public key file into the terminal. Copy the entire contents of the file from `ssh-rsa` to `testUser` inclusive.

   Type `exit` to exit the VM session.

8. In `vms.tf`, in the `internal_vm` resource block, add the following block of code to add the copied SSH key onto the internal-vm. This will allow SSH access from the external-vm into the internal-vm.
```
metadata = {
    ssh-keys = "testUser:<SSH KEY HERE>"
  }
```

9. In the terminal, run
```
terraform plan
```
You should see 0 to add, 1 change, 0 to destroy. Where the change is the addition of the SSH key. If you're happy with the plan, run
```
terraform apply
```
This should add the new SSH key to the internal_vm.

9. To test the connectivity to the internal-vm, we first must SSH back into the external-vm.

```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<EXTERNAL_IP>
```

10. Run the following command to test the SSH connection from our external-vm to our internal-vm. Where the <INTERNAL_IP> is the internal IP of the internal-vm. 
 ```
   ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<INTERNAL_IP>
```

10. You should now find that you have an SSH connection into the internal-vm. Therefore for SSH traffic to reach the internal-vm, it first must go through the external-vm. To check that the external-vm is SSH accessible from anywhere, and that the internal-vm is only accessible from the external-vm, run the following commands outside of any vm sessions. You can exit a vm session by typing `exit`. The first should form a successful connection. Then type exit to exit the session. The second should time out. 
```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<external-vm EXTERNAL_IP>
exit
ssh -i ~/.ssh/myKeyFile testUser@<internal-vm INTERNAL_IP>
```

## Finishing up
You have now created:
- VPC 
- Subnet 1 
- VM1 with external SSH connection enabled 
- VM2 with SSH enabled to receive connections only from VM1

You now have the base architecture for your first subnet where the external-vm will become a CI server with Jenkins, and the internal-vm will become a permenant slave agent.

## Next steps
The next guide to follow is subnet-2-architecture.md which will take you through the creation of the second subnet in the architecture.
